# Enrichment analysis - GSEA

A second generation of methods was designed to eliminate this dependency on the gene selection criteria by taking all gene expression values into consideration. The hypothesis behind these methods is that small but coordinated changes in sets of functionally related genes may also be important, in addition to the genes that have large expression changes. These methods are also known as Functional Class Scoring methods (FCS). A popular of approaches in this group is GSEA (Gene Set Enrichment Analysis).

This module uses fGSEA Bioconductor R package : The fgsea package allows one to conduct a pre-ranked GSEA in R, which is one approach in a GSEA. A p-value is estimated by permuting the genes in a gene set, which leads to randomly assigned gene sets of the same size. Note that “This approach is not strictly accurate because it ignores gene-gene correlations and will overestimate the significance levels and may lead to false positives.” However, it is still useful in getting an idea of the potential roles of the genes that are up- and down-regulated. If your pre-ranked GSEA returns no significant gene sets, you may still get an idea of what roles the up- and down-regulated genes may be involved in by examining the leading edge set. This set indicates the genes that contributed to the enrichment score.

By default the ranking metric is to simply take the signed fold change and multiply it by the -log10p-value. On the left of the plot will be the most significant up-regulated genes, and on the right the most significant down-regulated genes.
